---
title: "vPIM – Virtualization of Processing-in-Memory"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-09-01-paper-3
excerpt: 'This paper presents the vPIM project that is virtualization of processing-In-Memory'
date: 2024-09-01
venue: 'Middleware 2024'
paperurl: ''
citation: 'Dufy Teguia, Jiaxuan Chen, Stella Bitchebe, Oana Balmau, Alain Tchana, vPIM – Virtualization of Processing-in-Memory, Middleware 2024'
---

[See paper here (soon)]()

Data movement is the leading cause of performance degradation
and energy consumption in modern data centers. Processing in-
memory (PIM) is an architecture that addresses data movement by
bringing computation inside the memory chips. This paper is the
first to study the virtualization of PIM devices by designing and
implementing vPIM, an open-source UPMEM-based virtualization
system for the cloud. Our vPIM design considers four requirements:
Compatibility such that no hardware and no hypervisor changes
are needed; Multiplexing and isolation for a higher utilization ratio;
Utilizability and transparency such that applications written for
PIM can be efficiently run out-of-the-box, leading to rapid adoption;
Minimalization of virtualization performance overhead.
We prototype vPIM in Firecracker, expanding the virtio stan-
dard. Our experimental evaluation uses 16 applications provided by
PrIM, a recent PIM benchmark suite. The virtualization overhead is
between 1.01× and 2.07× for untouched PrIM applications. To keep
overhead low, vPIM introduces several optimizations: zero-copy
from guest OS to Firecracker, efficient virtio queues management,
efficient Guest Physical Address to Host Virtual Address translation,
parallel processing on multiple ranks, automatic data batching and
pre-fetching, and the reimplementation of some specific functional-
ities in C instead of Rust. We hope this work will lay the foundation
for future research on PIM for cloud computing.